Well, as we can see, our Scripture text for today, Proverbs 1, verse 5, highlights listening,
a wise person listens and takes in more instruction.
Today, we often equate learning with reading, because there is an abundance of books.
But why listen? Well, in Bible times, there were a few copies of the scriptures,
and they had to be made by hand. So listening really was the main way to learn
about Jehovah and His Word. So likely for this reason, the English edition of the New World
translation, expressions like read or read, appear only about 69 times. In contrast,
if we look up the words here, or hearing, or listening, we put together the various forms
of those words, and we get over 1200 times that those are found in the English New World translation.
So even though today we have an abundance of books, much of what we learn, though, is still
by listening. For example, a young child, how does a young child learn a language?
Well, you don't hand a child a grammar book and say, here you go, no, the child learns by listening
and absorbing sounds, and their youthful brain is made in such a way as if they begin to translate
those sounds into meaningful expressions, words, and phrases, and so forth. So we stop and think
then if listening is so important, what's involved in listening well? Well, today we'll take a
look at three basic things that will help us become better listeners. First of all, it's important
to remember that listening is connected with obedience in the Scriptures, and obedience saves
lives, as we know. Second, we'll discuss how listening involves active listening. We'll see what
that means. And finally point number three, we will discuss how listening involves manifesting
godly qualities. So let's begin with point number one, listening involves obedience. How is that so?
Well, in the Bible, we noticed that listening can be life-saving. We learned from Jehovah's instructions
to Moses before the 10th plague came upon Egypt. Very specific instructions had to be conveyed to
Moses, all about they're putting the blood on the doorposts and so forth. Moses in turn had to
verbally explain those instructions to the older men of Israel who in turn explained those instructions
to each household. Well, how did it go? Well, the Bible tells us very clearly all the sons of Israel
did just as Jehovah commanded. They did just so. So once again listening involved lives, obedience saves
lives. Well, this account highlights then the importance of listening in our time as well.
The book inside on the Scriptures says that in the Hebrew Scriptures the thought of obedience is
expressed by the word Shamah, which basically means to hear or to listen. For example, in Genesis
chapter 22 and verse 18, in speaking to Abraham, Jehovah says, all nations of the earth will obtain
a blessing for themselves because you listened to my voice. Well, what Jehovah meant was essentially
Abraham obeyed Jehovah's voice as well. Jesus also stressed the importance of listening. How often?
Well, at least seven times in the gospel accounts, Jesus uses the expression, let the one who has ears
listen. Let's look at just one example of that in Luke chapter 8. Notice Jesus here gives an
illustration about different kinds of soil. We'll take a look at verse 8, Luke 8 and verse 8.
It says, but others fell on the good soil and after sprouting, they produced 100 times more fruit.
As he said these things, he called out, let the one who has ears to listen, listen. Well, did the
disciples take his advice? Did they really listen as Jesus explained this parable? Well, we don't have
to guess. Notice verse 9. But his disciples asked him what this illustration meant. That brief
sentence indicates the disciples were engaged. They wanted to know more. Well, we call that
active listening, if you will, when you ask questions. So Jesus commended them for that.
Notice in the very next verse, he said, to you, it is granted to understand the sacred secrets of
the kingdom of God. And then he went on to explain the meaning of that illustration.
So what can we learn from Jesus' disciples about listening? Well, in addition to what we've just
discussed earlier about obedience, this time we learned that by asking questions, they showed
they were actively listening, as I mentioned. Active listening is better than simply passive listening.
So how can we do so? We have abundant opportunities in Jehovah's organization to listen, don't we?
At our meetings, morning worship, such as we're having today. Also in our ministry, we listen to
householders and so forth. Well, you might want to note a very nice reference about what's involved
in listening. It's in the ministry schoolbook page 13. There's a box. It's called tips for
effective listening. And it lists seven different points that help us to listen actively. Among them,
pray to be able to concentrate, keep your eyes on the speaker that helps us stay engaged
with his message. Look up the scriptures as he cites them. Mentally respond, when perhaps in
a discussion like the watch tower, mentally respond to what the questions are after. If the comment
is being given, pay attention to the comments. Take brief notes. You notice the expression
brief. We don't want to try to write a manuscript. We'll never be able to keep up. But if we take brief
notes, it has a beneficial effect. We will remember better what is being discussed. Why? Because the
very act of taking notes causes us to focus on the material. One young man named Michael 16 years
of age, he says, when I take brief notes, it keeps my mind on track. So even if we don't look at
those notes again, we do ourselves a big favor by taking brief notes. It keeps us focused.
Well, those are some of those seven points. But besides actively listening, the disciples
manifested something else. What was that? Well, let's look at Luke now, chapter 8 again, and this
time, verse 15. It says, as for that seed that is sold on the fine soil, these are the ones who
after hearing the word with a fine and good heart retain it and bear fruit with endurance. You
notice that Jesus used an expression here, hearing the word with a fine and good heart.
Well, a fine and good heart is point number three in our discussion. A person with a fine heart
normally manifests good Christian qualities. One of them is humility. Our scripture text for today,
Proverbs 1 verse 5 is a classic example of humility and action. A wise person listens and takes
in more instruction. Why would a person who is already wise continue listening, continue taking
in more? Well, because he's humble. He realizes never going to know everything about everything,
only Jehovah does. But by continuing to listen, he shows humility. We can do the same when we're at
Christian meetings, here at Morning Worship each day. The more we listen, the more we learn.
Realistically, though, of course, it's a challenge to concentrate, to pay attention at our meetings,
morning worship. There are distractions. There are distractions. How often perhaps if you had a text
show up right in the middle of a meeting and you're trying to concentrate, but all of a sudden now
you're divided? Well, this highlights the value of having a fine heart. Another was not only
humility to learn new things, but also to exercise another guiding quality, self-control,
self-control. It takes self-control to ignore distractions, texts or emails or whatever.
But if we do so, if we manifest qualities like this, notice the benefit Jesus says and Luke 8 verse 18.
He says, therefore, pay attention to how you listen for whoever has will be given more.
In other words, we'll be blessed with more knowledge, more understanding. So as it says in Proverbs
chapter 1 verse 5, if we're listening, paying attention, why we'll be wise in a godly way,
we'll be a person who truly listens and who truly benefits.